---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/coding/blind-75/13-longest-substring-without-repeating-characters/","created":"2023-09-28T23:50:16.873+02:00","updated":"2023-09-28T23:50:16.873+02:00","dg-note-properties":{}}
---

# 13. Longest Substring Without Repeating Characters
#leetcode/3
## Problem [🔗](https://leetcode.com/problems/longest-substring-without-repeating-characters)
Given a string `s`, find the length of the longest substring without repeating characters.

**Example:**
```
Input: s = "abcabcbb"
Output: 3
```

## Solution
#### Solution in C++ using two pointers and a hashmap
The idea is to iteratively find the longest substring without repeating characters by maintaining a sliding window approach. We use two pointers (`low` and `high`) to represent the boundaries of the current substring. As we iterate through the string, we update the pointers and adjust the window to accommodate new unique characters and eliminate repeating characters.
Here's the process:
1. The map stores characters as keys and their indices as values.
3. We still maintain the `low` and `high` pointers and the `maxSoFar` variable.
4. We iterate through the string using the `high` pointer.
5. If the current character is not in the map or its index is less than `left`, it means it is a new unique character. Then. we update the `map` with the character's index and update the `maxSoFar` if necessary.
6. If the character is repeating within the current substring, we move the `low` pointer to the next position after the last occurrence of the character.
7. We update the index of the current character in the `map` and continue the iteration.
8. At the end, we return `maxSoFar` as the length of the longest substring without repeating characters.

```cpp
int lengthOfLongestSubstring(string s) {
	unordered_map<char, int> map;
	int maxHere = 0, maxSoFar = 0;
	for(int low = 0, high = 0; high < s.size(); high++) {
		char currChar = s[high];
		
		if(map.contains(currChar) && map[currChar] >= low)
			low = map[currChar] + 1;
		
		maxHere = high - low + 1;
		maxSoFar = max(maxSoFar, maxHere);
		map[currChar] = high;
	}
	return max(maxHere, maxSoFar);
}
```
- **Time complexity:** $O(n)$ (where _n_ is the size of the string)
- **Space complexity:** $O(n)$ (we are storing all the input)