---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/coding/cracking-the-coding-interview/concepts/1-2-how-to-prepare/"}
---

# How to Prepare
## 1. Listen Carefully
Be sure to record any _unique_ information in the problem.
For example, if the question starts with "Given two arrays **that are sorted**", the optimal algorithm for the sorted solution is probably different from the unsorted one.

## 2. Draw an Example
You have to create an example that is **specific** (that uses real numbers or strings), **sufficiently large** and as **general** as possible.

## 3. State a Brute Force Algorithm
Even if it's obvious for you, it is not necessarily obvious for all candidates. Despite being slow, explain the [[Coding/Cracking the Coding Interview/Concepts/1.1 Big O#⏱️ Time complexity\|1.1 Big O#⏱️ Time complexity]] and the [[Coding/Cracking the Coding Interview/Concepts/1.1 Big O#💾 Space Complexity\|1.1 Big O#💾 Space Complexity]] of the algorithm.

## 4. Optimize
- Be sure to use all the information given at [[Coding/Cracking the Coding Interview/Concepts/1.2 How to Prepare#1 Listen Carefully\|1.2 How to Prepare#1 Listen Carefully]]. 
- Storing extra state about the problem or precompute information could help. 
- Consider using [[Coding/Data Structures/Hash Tables\|Hash Tables]].
- Think about [[Coding/Cracking the Coding Interview/Concepts/1.3 Optimize & Solve Technique\|1.3 Optimize & Solve Technique]]

## 5. Walk Through
**Solidify** your understanding of the algorithm. If you made some mistakes in the previous parts and you start coding, it will take longer to fix first the algorithm, and then the code.

## 6. Implement
Do this preferably on paper. 
Remember:
- **Modularized code**
	- ❌ `int** matrix = { {1,2,3}, {4,5,6}, ...}`
	- ✅ `int** matrix = initMatrix(int size)`
- **Use //TODO** and just explain out loud if needed
- **Good variable names**
	- ❌ _a_, _b_, _c_
	- ✅ _startChild_ (even better if you abbrieviate it after the first usage)

## 7. Test
Hand testing is very slow $\rightarrow$ very long time to find small errors.
Remember:
1. Just read and analyze what each line of code does.
2. Double check weird looking code and hot spots like:
	- _x = length - 2_
	- _for(int i = 1; ...)_
	- Base cases in recursion
	- null nodes
3. Small test cases.
4. Special cases (null or single element values ecc.).